Title: What Democrats Said About Immigrants And Immigration Policy At The DNC
Source: City and State New York
Date: August 22, 2024
URL: https://www.forbes.com/sites/stuartanderson/2024/08/22/what-democrats-said-about-immigrants-and-immigration-policy-at-the-dnc/
Article Text: Democrats said more than expected about immigration during the Democratic National Convention, emphasizing border solutions, immigrants and the American Dream. The speeches surprised those who thought Democrats would avoid discussing immigration in the lead-up to nominating Kamala Harris. The positive messages on immigration at the DNC contrast with Republican presidential nominee Donald Trump speaking negatively about immigrants before Republican National Convention delegates waving “Mass Deportation Now!” signs. Significant policy differences on immigration can be seen between the two parties.
Kamala Harris Acceptance Speech
In her acceptance speech, Kamala Harris spoke about her immigrant parents, particularly the strength of her Indian immigrant mother who became a cancer researcher. “My mother was 19 when she crossed the world alone, traveling from India to California, with an unshakeable dream to be the scientist who would cure breast cancer,” Harris said.
“My mother was a brilliant, five-foot-tall, brown woman with an accent,” said Harris. “And, as the eldest child, I saw how the world would sometimes treat her. But she never lost her cool. She was tough. Courageous,” Harris said. “She taught us to never complain about injustice. But…do something about it.”
Harris addressed border security and spoke about the bill the Biden administration supported to address illegal immigration. “But Donald Trump believes a border deal would hurt his campaign,” she said. “So, he ordered his allies in Congress to kill the deal,” she said. “I refuse to play politics with our security.” She promised to “bring back the bipartisan border security bill” and “sign it into law.”
Harris mixed in support for border security with a positive view of immigrants and support for legalization of the undocumented.
“I know we can live up to our proud heritage as a nation of immigrants and reform our broken immigration system,” Harris said. “We can create an earned pathway to citizenship—and secure our border.”
The Democratic Party Platform On Immigration
The Democratic Party platform’s immigration section begins, “since our founding, immigrants have traveled to America to pursue freedom and opportunity, to flee oppression, and to reunite with family members, and in turn have made our country stronger.”
The platform devotes a section to “Securing the Border” that includes paragraphs on “Reform the Asylum System” and “Temporary Emergency Authority to Shut Down the Border.” The asylum reforms discuss President Joe Biden’s executive action that limited asylum claims for those crossing unlawfully when Border Patrol encounters exceed a specific threshold. The “emergency authority” references power the administration requested in legislation that stalled in the Senate after Donald Trump told allies he did not support it, implying he preferred to use the issue politically.
The Democratic platform notes illegal immigration fell after the executive action. Government data confirm that actions by the Biden administration and Mexico’s government reduced Border Patrol encounters at the Southwest border, a proxy for illegal entry. Based on border arrests, illegal entry was lower in July 2024 than during Donald Trump’s last month in office: 56,408 Border Patrol encounters in July 2024 vs. 75,316 in January 2021.
The Democratic Party platform includes references to expanding legal immigration, protecting long-time residents from deportation and increasing lawful pathways to deter illegal entry. The U.S. Citizenship Act would permanently increase family-sponsored and employment-based immigration by 250,000 over 5 years, according to the party platform.
Beyond the additional green cards, the Democratic platform did not address the long waits for employment-based immigrant visas or the per-country limit. However, the Biden administration tried to include in the 2022 CHIPS and Science Act an exemption from annual green card limits for foreign nationals with a Ph.D. in STEM fields and those with a master’s degree “in a critical industry.” That would have addressed the long waits for employment-based green cards for many individuals. Democrats in the House passed the bill with those provisions, but the ranking Republican on the Senate Judiciary Committee, Sen. Charles Grassley (R-IA), blocked the measures from becoming law.
Trump’s administration enacted or proposed numerous restrictions on H-1B visa holders and employment-based green card holders, including attempting to price them out of the U.S. labor market. Except for what analysts consider an unserious proposal to give green cards to international students graduating from U.S. universities—made in a podcast—there is no evidence a second Trump term will be any less restrictive on high-skilled immigration.The document touts efforts to protect entrants to the Deferred Action for Childhood Arrivals or DACA program and “an estimated 500,000 American families” with a spouse in unlawful status. If in the country at least ten years, such spouses could apply for permanent residence.
The platform lauds the Biden administration’s humanitarian parole programs for Cubans, Haitians, Nicaraguans, and Venezuelans. A National Foundation for American Policy analysis found the programs reduced illegal entry. “After the Biden administration introduced humanitarian parole programs, Border Patrol encounters declined by 92% for Cubans, Haitians and Nicaraguans as a group between December 2022 (the month before the parole programs started) and November 2023 compared to an 18% increase for nationals of non-parole countries,” according to the analysis. The programs are also safer for participants.
The Democratic platform differed from the Republican Party platform, which focused on mass deportation, completing the border wall and a call to “seal the border and stop the migrant invasion.” The Republicans made no reference to expanding ways to enter the United States legally. One of the only mentions in the GOP platform of legal immigration used the code words “end chain migration” to advocate eliminating family immigration categories, which would reduce legal immigration levels. That would be consistent with immigration policy during the Trump administration, during which fewer legal immigrants were admitted due to executive branch restrictions.
Democratic Speakers Talked About Immigration
The Democratic party designated several speakers to discuss immigration. Rep. Veronica Escobar (D-TX) emphasized her roots at the border, explaining that when she was a child, her family would travel back and forth across the border between Texas and Mexico. She argued Republicans see the border as a “political opportunity to exploit” rather than an “issue to address.” She accused the GOP of blocking legislative efforts: “With Kamala Harris as president . . . we can strengthen legal pathways to immigration . . . secure our borders . . . and treat with dignity those who seek a better future.”
Sen. Chris Murphy (D-CT) spoke about negotiating a border bill with conservative Republicans before Trump stopped the effort. “It would have had unanimous support if it weren’t for Donald Trump,” said Murphy. “We can be a nation of immigrants who love their country and a nation with a secure border.” The senator cited the Emma Lazarus poem engraved on the Statue of Liberty. “The last line reads: I lift my lamp before the golden door.”
Ana Navarro, a political commentator and host on The View, talked about her immigrant roots and growing up under a dictatorship in Nicaragua during the DNC. “I fled communism from Nicaragua when I was eight years old,” she said. “And let me tell you what communist dictators do. And it’s never just for one day. They attack the free press.”
Navarro continued that “they refuse to accept legitimate elections when they lose,” adding “Is there anybody running for president who reminds you of that?”
A video of Dreamers allowed each to emphasize their hope to remain in America, “this great nation,” said one DACA recipient, rather than be deported. Daishi Miguel-Tanaka said he wanted the opportunity to continue to work and provide for his family in the United States.
Javier Salazar, sheriff of Bexar County, Texas, spoke of the horrors of finding the bodies of dead migrants smuggled into the United States and packed into vehicles. “When Trump comes down to Texas stands next to officers, he is not there to help us,” he said. “He is a self-serving man. Just like killing the border bill—he just made our jobs harder.”
Carlos Eduardo Espina, a young Latino Texan and content creator, proved to be an effective speaker on immigration. He talked about his parents immigrating to America and, like other immigrants, hoping to fulfill dreams and ambitions impossible in their home countries. He criticized Trump’s accusation that immigrants are “poisoning the blood” of America. Espina called it “anti-American.”
Espina soon had the Democratic crowd applauding by quoting the most conservative Republican president in U.S. history. “Because, as Ronald Reagan once said, we lead the world because unique among nations, we draw our people, our strength, from every country and every corner of the world,” he said. “Reagan knew that welcoming immigrants is not a Democratic or Republican value. It’s an American value. To be pro-immigrant is to be pro-America.”